\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header (This is for running texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename Hamid_En
@settitle Resume--Irfan Hamid
@c %**end of header (This is for running texinfo on a region.)

@heading @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @sc{Irfan Hamid}
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @uref{mailto:irfan.hamid@@gmail.com,,irfan.hamid@@gmail.com}

@noindent
Engineer with an interest in scalability, performance optimization, real-time systems and functional programming. Experience in the web and enterprise search domains.

@unnumberedsec Professional Experience
@multitable @columnfractions 0.32 0.48 0.2
@item @strong{Salesforce.com} @tab @strong{Principal Member of Technical Staff} @tab @strong{2016-Present}
@end multitable
@noindent
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Infrastructure ownership:} Own the search infrastructure. Responsible for Search fleet, builds, monitoring, alerting and security.
@item @strong{Dynamic ranking optimization:} Prototyped a dynamic ranking runtime that uses Intel SSEx and AVX vectorizing instruction sets to improve performance at query time.
@end itemize
@multitable @columnfractions 0.32 0.475 0.205
@item @strong{Salesforce.com} @tab @strong{Lead Member of Technical Staff} @tab @strong{2014-2016}
@end multitable
@noindent
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Search distributed systems functionality:} Developed the replication and distributed management layer for search. Complete redesign of the existing ad-hoc system to use Apache ZooKeeper; principal for the design and development of the new subsystem and closely involved in the deployment and monitoring aspects.
@item @strong{Search migration to Apache Solr:} Part of team that migrated away from a Lucene based indexer running on top of a SAN to a horizontally scaleable search infrastructure based on Apache Solr.
@end itemize
@multitable @columnfractions 0.32 0.48 0.2
@item @strong{Microsoft Corp.} @tab @strong{SDE and SDE 2} @tab @strong{2008-2014}
@end multitable
@noindent
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Volatility improvements:} Developed the metric and tooling for quantifying differences in search results for the same query. 
@item @strong{Lossy key-value compression:} Implemented a key-value lookup system based on a Bloom filter using minimum perfect hashing.
@item @strong{Bing Instant Answers:} Wrote service code on the query critical path--invoked on every query--that carries out arbitration of rich content like images and videos on the page.
@item @strong{Suggested Sites:} Wrote offline code to calculate correlations between pairs of URLs in Bing's index for relevancy improvements.
@end itemize

@multitable @columnfractions 0.6 0.2 0.2
@item @strong{Advanced Engineering Research Organization}
@tab @strong{SDE}
@tab @strong{2001-2003}
@end multitable
@noindent
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Radar Display Processor:} Developed a radar data acquisition and display system in Linux. Currently in use by the Civil Aviation Authority of Pakistan.
@item @strong{C@math{^4}I Comm. System:} Developed a self-forming WAN over heterogeneous media for a C@math{^4}I (Command, Control, Communication, Computers and Intelligence) system.
@end itemize

@unnumberedsec Education
@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.72 0.2
@item @strong{PhD} @tab @strong{@'Ecole Nationale Sup@'erieure des T@'el@'ecommunications, Paris} @tab @strong{2005-2008}
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Thesis:} Automatic code generation and verification of hard real-time systems
@item @strong{Jury remarks:} Mention tr@`es honorable (with high honors)
@end itemize

@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.72 0.2
@item @strong{MSc} @tab @strong{@'Ecole Nationale Sup@'erieure des
T@'el@'ecommunications, Paris} @tab @strong{2003-2004}
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Major:} Distributed and real-time systems
@item @strong{Grades:} 16/20
@end itemize

@multitable @columnfractions 0.08 0.72 0.2
@item @strong{BS} @tab @strong{GIK Institute of Technology, Pakistan}
@tab @strong{1997-2001}
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Major:} Computer system engineering
@item @strong{GPA:} 3.4/4.0
@end itemize

@c@multitable @columnfractions 0.8 0.2
@c@item @strong{GIK Institute of Technology, Pakistan} @tab
@c@strong{2000-2001}
@c@end multitable
@c@noindent
@c My end of studies project was a complete cockpit design and instrument
@c simulation system for the Pakistan Air Force. The system was built
@c using Direct3D and allowed the user to design his cockpit and fly it
@c in a 3D virtual world to test its ergonomics and usability.

@unnumberedsec Publications
@itemize @bullet
@item Irfan Hamid, Elie Najm. @strong{Operational Semantics of Ada Ravenscar}. @emph{13th European Conference on Dependable Computing AdaEurope'08.} June 2008.
@item Irfan Hamid, Bechir Zalila, Elie Najm, J@'er@^ome
Hugues. @strong{Generating Frameworks for Asynchronous Hard Real-time
Systems}. @emph{Innovations in
Systems and Software Engineering: A NASA Journal}. March 2008.
@item Irfan Hamid, Elie Najm. @strong{Real-time Connectors for
Deterministic Data-flow.} @emph{13th IEEE International Conference on
Embedded and Real-time Computing Systems and Applications}. August
2007.
@item Irfan Hamid, Bechir Zalila, Elie Najm, J@'er@^ome
Hugues. @strong{A Generative Approach to Building a Framework for a Hard
Real-Time System.} @emph{31st Annual IEEE/NASA Goddard
Software Engineering Workshop}. March 2007.
@item Bechir Zalila, Irfan Hamid, J@'er@^ome Hugues, Laurent
Pautet. @strong{Generating High-integrity Distributed Applications from their
Architectural Descriptions.} @emph{12th European
Conference on Dependable Computing AdaEurope'07.} July 2007.
@item Thomas Vergnaud, Irfan Hamid. @strong{Mod@'elisation en AADL
pour la g@'en@'eration automatique d'applications.} @emph{G@'enie
Logiciel, March 2007, Issue 80.}
@item Thomas Vergnaud, Irfan Hamid et. al. @strong{Modeling and
Generating Tailored Distribution Middleware for Embedded Real-time
Systems.} @emph{Embedded Real-time Systems 2006 (ERTS'06).} January 2006
@end itemize

@unnumberedsec Skillset
@multitable @columnfractions 0.15 0.15 0.7
@item @strong{Technology} @tab @strong{Experience} @tab @strong{Major output}
@item C/C++ @tab 10 years @tab Multiple projects, academic and professional
@item C#/F# @tab 5 years @tab Multiple relevance, measurement and analysis tools at Bing 
@item Java @tab 4 years @tab Salesforce Search, AADL to Ada code generator
@item Puppet @tab 2 years @tab Search infrastructure and ZooKeeper buildouts
@item Kerberos @tab 1.5 years @tab Salesforce Search to ZooKeeper authentication
@item Ada 95/2005 @tab 2 years @tab AADL to Ada code generator
@item Win32 @tab 6 years @tab Undergrad senior project (flight sim and instrumentation)
@item Linux @tab 10 years @tab Radar Display Processor, Salesforce search
@item UML  @tab 3 years @tab Meta-models and transformations in code
@end multitable
@noindent
Expertise in various modeling languages such as SDL, Esterel, Lustre and formal methods such as process algebrae (LOTOS) and timed automata (UPPAAL).

@c@unnumberedsec Achievements
@c@itemize @bullet
@c@item Selected for graduate studies in France in 2003
@c@item Dean's honor roll (GPA > 3.5) for 4 semesters out of 8 during BS
@c@item Invited as judge of All Pakistan Software Competition, 2002
@c@item Conducted 10 day ACM workshop on OpenGL and DirectX at my university
@c@item Fluent in English, French and Urdu/Hindi
@c@end itemize

@bye
